Issues

Majority of comments deal with logistics.  Cadre logistics concern issues affecting the cadre of instructors.  Course logistics concern presentation of the course.

Deficiencies in logistics planning primarily cost instructors time in trip preparation.  This time was billed to the ONR-RC program in the form of IDT/ATP.  Had logistics been more streamlined, the IDT/ATP funds could have been used to support other projects in ONR.

Cadre Logistics

Administrative requirements to enter AFRICOM AOR were being identified periodically throughout the pre-deployment phase.  Multiple versions of guidance (in pdf format) were released during this phases, with additional requirements promulgated via e-mail as the departure date.  While an officer was assigned the duties to coordinate these logistics, it appears as an observer, that she did not receive complete information from her AFRICOM points of contact.

The incremental identification of requirements cost a small amount of additional time for analysis of the requirments, redundant reporting and caused a small amount of frustration.  Regardless, the trip went off as planned.

COCOMs are large organizations, but there should be an office dedicated to tracking administrative requirements for personnel entering the AOR. Recommend that an officer who is part of the ***instructor cadre*** be given the collateral duty to liase with the COCOM and create one set of guidance in checklist form for all training, medical and administrative requirements.  Allow me to reiterate:  one DEFINITIVE LIST in CHECKLIST FORM.  This will allow the instructors to do as little thinking about administration as possible and focus on course content preparation.

If possible, the admin-logistics officer should have civilian employment at a COCOM or government agency.  This will make coordination much easier for obvious reasons.

Passport/Visa

ONR does not support reservists in obtaining official passports or obtaining visas.  As a result, the instructor cadre was left to their own devices to obtain passports and visas.  This cost instructors a large amount of time as they independently researched requirements, filled out forms, etc.  

Original guidance was to send the visa application to a drilling reservist in Pensacola who happened to have the credentials to submit a visa request to the DoD office.  I did not have confidence in this guidance and expended a large amount of time (billed to ONR) to discover the right way to do this.

The DoD passport/visa office is at Ft. Belvoir.  Each command is (required) supposed to have a passport/visa specialist to handle travel for their unit.  Fortunately, I already had an official passport from previous active duty.  I had no experience with visas; my previous command handled this for all travelers.  Ideally, my reserve center should have processed my visa application.  The training office at NOSC Raleigh took the visa for action, but got back to me over a week later, admitting they did not have the ability to submit my visa.

I discovered the visa guidance for Ghana on the DoD site and called the office so that I could get a plain language explanation of how the process worked.  One detail was that Ghana required a letter of invitation to enter the country; we did not have these letters!  Swift action by the project officer resulted in obtaining the letters only 5 weeks prior to our departure date.

Also fortunately, I work at a COCOM (USCENTCOM).  Despite the fact I am a contractor, because of *personal contacts* from prior active duty, the passport/visa office at USCENTCOM processed my visa application for Ghana.

Everyone did receive their visas in time for the trip, but the process was time consuming in my case and likely time consuming for the others.  Had one thing gone wrong, it is possible one or more instructors would not have been able to board the flight.  At the very least more time would have been needed (and paid for by ONR).

Strongly recommend that ONRG provide guidance to project officers for OCONUS missions and process passports and visas.  This would result in lower costs and reduced risks for the ONR-RC program.


Packing list

The reality of Ghana was not entirely clear during the leadup to the mission.  Ghana's infrastructure is intermittent in nature, and this includes running water and electricity.  The water is not potable. We were requested to bring some items (deet, first aid kit, signal mirror?), but no coherent packing list.  Recommend a packing list for non-western countries be prepared for future participants.  A non-exhaustive list includes:

Deet
Sunscreen
Mosquito netting
zip ties
Toilet paper
Field wipes (huge wet wipes for cleaning whole body)
Flashlight
Duct tape
bungee cord
ziplock bags
anti-bacterial soap
small basin/canteen for shaving (with bottled water)
plug converters (power converters for non-electronics)


Currency Exchange

We received guidance that a bank branch inside the US Embassy would exchange our dollars for the local currency (cedi, GH).  When we arrived at 1530, we were informed that the Embassy was closed at 1200 that day.  On Saturday, we attempted to exchange money at an Ecobank (pan-African bank) and was informed that "the platform" was down.  On Monday, we attempted to change dollars for cedi again and were told that there were "computer problems".  The bank advised us to go to the "Foreign Exchange Bureau".

Our cab driver took us to the foreign exchange bureau that from the outside looked like a pawnshop in a really bad neighborhood.  Inside, two casually dressed gentlemen exchanged our currency from behind a barred counter.  They issued receipts and everything was in order.  They were running out of cedi.  We exchanged roughly $2500 USD and the last $200 consisted of GH 5 notes.  Roughly $1.60.

On the ride back to the University, our knowledgable cab driver explained that the banks were no longer exchangng foreign currency.  Some sort of political issue involving use of foreign currency for B2B transactions.  Not sure if this was a temporary issue.

What is staggering is that the bank lied to us.  Twice.

ATMs are available on campus, but their operation is not consistent and the risk for fraud is non-zero.  We were advised that credit cards are not typically used in Ghana. The amount of money to bring was based on lodging costs for the student housing (40 CD a night).

Lodging

Our lodging was set arranged in the student housing hall "Frances Sey", one of 4 cavernous structures on the southern boundary of campus.  The commemoration plaque suggested the structure was only 2.5 years old.  If true, it suffered from lack of maintenance since that time.

Instructors' rooms had a number of maintenance issues, including clogged sink, broken toilet seat, broken cabinetry.  When the water worked, it provided a weak drizzle or water.  We suffered a two day water outage at one point.  Electricity also went out on at least two occasions.

The building had no air conditioning and all rooms had vermin of one variety or another.  I had ants and a large lizard.  I welcomed the lizard, as it likely kept the insect population down.

I and another instructor moved to the guest lodge

Dining

Ghanian food, with the exception of Jolof rice and a black fish-based sauce, is bland.  Mostly starches (rice, cassava, plaintain) with small amounts of meat (chicken/fish) are consumed.  Few fruits and vegetables are served.

Infrastructure problems extend to food distribution.  A menu at a restaurant is a list of *possibilities*, not a list of what they actually have that night.  The Ghanian kitchens seem to use a FIFO structure.  A table of diners will not receive their food at the same time, but when it is ready.  You will also wait an indeterminant period of time for your meal.  I once waited over an hour for a small pizza.

Additionally, the waitress will never come to your table unless she is taking your order or delivering food.  Expect to spend a longer amount of time dining than you would in the US.


Ghanian Culture

English is the official language, but in reality Ghanians learn a tribal language and English in school.  Many customer service personnel have weak English skills.

There are cultural differences.  A small retail store might not be open during business hours because the operator is running an errand.

The people seem very honest at their core; Carl left CD 60 in his pocket and the laundress returned it.  Taxi drivers provided accurate fare information and directions from people on the street were accurate.  However, there were situations where questions were occasionally answered disonestly.

Occasionally, answers were given that were untrue in situations where we would be given bad news.  When trying to determine when the laundry would reopen, the laundress told me she would be there in a half hour.  When I called back 40 minutes later, it was clear she had no intention of returning for the day.  Whether this was a language issue or a cultural issue was never clarified.  Earlier, I described how bank employees lied about their reasons for not exchanging currency.


Course Logistics

IT Infrastructure

Computer Lab/Classroom consisted of 35 workstations, but about 20% of the workstations were inoperative or did not have internet access (Carl, did you record an exact count?)  The workstations were loaded with windows 7.  They were not ready for use.

The University of Ghana does not appear to have a consistent sysadmin policy.  Accounts used by students had administrator privileges.  Each workstation had a different mix of superflous programs (entertainment mostly) loaded.  These programs were (eventually) removed.

Students surfing the web and downloading programs with admin privileges introduced a lot of malware.  The freeware program, "Malware Bytes", was used to scan each machine.  A staggering amount of malware was discovered.  One machine had over 5000 malware objects, but the typical amount fell into the 50-200 range of malware objects.  The malware was of all types: adware, rootkits, spam generators, keyloggers, click fraud, etc.  As malware was removed, interesting things were discovered.  My favorite was the malware that kept pinging its home servers in Russia for instructions, which were then being blocked.

Windows updates were not applied or even turned on most of the machines.  Much time and effort (the entire weekend) was spent updating windows, removing malware and superflous programs from machines in the lab.  This was a prerequisite before the VMWare and Linux distribution were loaded on each machine.

This experience leads to two different recommendations.

Advance Team.  Assuming future venues are similar, send two IT-savvy instructors 2 days in advance to configure the lab for use by the instructors and students.

Train the staff.  Provide instruction to the educational institution staff on IT admin.  This might be more valuable long term, as the work we did configuring machines will swiftly be nullified by the current set of bad practices.  The idea is that the local staff can configure the machines and maintain them in the future.  Cultural differences and sensitivities may prove a challenge here.


